README.md, before:

![Image of Gopher flying](https://github.com/glycerine/zygomys/blob/master/media/high_altitude_gopher.png)

# zygomys - An embedded scripting language for Go.

### Quickly create a mini-language to configure your project

zygomys is an embeddable scripting language. It is a modernized Lisp with an object-oriented flavor, and
provides an interpreter and REPL (Read-Eval-Print-Loop;
that is, it comes with a command line interactive interface).

### Tell me more

zygomys allows you to create a Domain Specific Language to drive
your program with minimal fuss and maximum convenience.

It is written in Go and plays easily with Go programs
and Go structs, using reflection to instantiate trees of Go structs
from the scripted configuration. These data structures are native
Go, and Go methods will run on them at compiled-Go speed.

Because it speaks JSON and Msgpack fluently, zygomys is ideally suited for driving
complex configurations and providing projects with a domain specific
language customized to your challenges and driving Go code.

The example snippets in the tests/*.zy provide many examples.
The full [documentation can be found in the Wiki](https://github.com/glycerine/zygomys/wiki).
zygomys blends traditional and new. While the s-expression syntax
defines a Lisp, zygomys borrows some syntax from Clojure,
and some (notably the for-loop style) directly from the Go/C tradition.

The standalone REPL is called simply `zygo`.  `zygo` is also shorthand for the whole project when speaking aloud. In writing, the full `zygomys` is used to aid searchability.

### Installation

~~~
$ go get github.com/glycerine/zygomys/cmd/zygo
~~~

### Not your Grandfather's Parentheses... features in zygomys 2.0.5 include

 * [x] New in 2.0: dot-symbols! dot-symbols such as `.plane` or `.plane.wing` give OO-flavor and compact, expressive notation. [See the wiki](https://github.com/glycerine/zygomys/wiki#differences-from-traditional-lisp-syntax) for discussion.
 * [x] dot-symbols avoid the need for macros in many cases
 * [x] readable assignment: `(.a = 10)` assigns value 10 to symbol `a`  (NB use `==` for equality checks.)
 * [x] readable nested method calls: `(.a.b.c Fly)` calls method `Fly` on object `c` that lives within objects `a` and `b`.
 * [x] Use `zygo` to configure trees of Go structs, and then run methods on them at natively-compiled speed (since you are calling into Go code).
 * [x] `emacs/zygo.el` emacs mode provides one-keypress stepping through code
 * [x] command line editing, with tab-complete for keywords (courtesy of https://github.com/peterh/liner)
 * [x] JSON and Msgpack interop: serialization and deserialization.
 * [x] `(range key value hash_or_array (body))` range loops act like Go for-range loops: iterate through hashes or arrays.
 * [x] `(for [(initializer) (test) (advance)] (body))` for-loops match those in C and Go. Both `(break)` and `(continue)` are available for additional loop control.
 * [x] Raw bytes type `(raw string)` lets you do zero-copy `[]byte` manipulation.
 * [x] Record definitions `(defmap)` make configuration a breeze.
 * [x] Files can be recursively sourced with `(req path)` or `(source "path-string")`.
 * [x] Go style raw string literals, using `` `backticks` ``, can contain newlines and `"` double quotes directly. Easy templating.
 * [x] Easy to extend. See the `repl/random.go`, `repl/regexp.go`, and `repl/time.go` files for examples.
 * [x] Clojure like threading `(-> hash field1: field2:)` and `(:field hash)` selection. 
 * [x] Lisp style macros for your DSL.

### Obligatory XKCD

![Obligatory XKCD: "elegant weapons... for a more civilized age"](http://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/lisp_cycles.png)


### Additional features

 * [x] zygomys is a small Go library, easy to integrate and use/extend.
 * [x] Float (float64), Int (int64), Char, String, Symbol, List, Array, and Hash datatypes builtin.
 * [x] Arithmetic (`+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `mod`, `**`)
 * [x] Shift Operators (`sll`, `srl`, `sra`)
 * [x] Bitwise operations (`bit-and`, `bit-or`, `bit-xor`)
 * [x] Comparison operations (`<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=`, `==`, `!=`, and `not=`)
 * [x] Short-circuit boolean operators (`and` and `or`)
 * [x] Conditionals (`cond`)
 * [x] Lambdas (`fn`)
 * [x] Bindings (`def`, `defn`, and `let`)
 * [x] Standalone and embedable REPL.
 * [x] Tail-call optimization
 * [x] Go API
 * [x] Macro System with macexpand `(macexpand (your-macro))` makes writing/debugging macros easy. 
 * [x] Syntax quoting -- with caret `^()` instead of backtick.
 * [x] Channel and goroutine support
 * [x] Lexical scope.

[See the wiki for lots of details and a full description of the zygomys language.](https://github.com/glycerine/zygomys/wiki).

### Where did the name zygomys come from?

zygomys is a contraction of Zygogeomys, [a genus of pocket gophers. The Michoacan pocket gopher (Zygogeomys trichopus) finds its natural habitat in high-altitude forests.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michoacan_pocket_gopher)

The term is also descriptive. The stem `zygo` comes from the Greek for yoke, indicating a pair or a union of two things, and `mys` comes from the Greek for mouse. The union of Go and Lisp in a small cute package, that is zygomys.

### License

Two-clause BSD, see LICENSE file.

### Author

Jason E. Aten, Ph.D.

### Credits

The ancestor dialect, [Glisp](https://github.com/zhemao/glisp), was designed and implemented by [Howard Mao](https://zhehaomao.com/).

The Go gopher was designed by Renee French. (http://reneefrench.blogspot.com/)
The design is licensed under the Creative Commons 3.0 Attributions license.
Read this article for more details: https://blog.golang.org/gopher

[XKCD https://xkcd.com/297/](https://xkcd.com/297/) licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 2.5 License(https://xkcd.com/license.html).

Commit message:

Emphasize "Why use it?", "What is it?"
"Why would I use this?" and "What is it? (How does it work?)" are two questions likely to be asked immediately by persons seeing a tool for the first time. Answering those questions immediately may expedite people both understanding and using the project.

README.md, after:

![Image of Gopher flying](https://github.com/glycerine/zygomys/blob/master/media/high_altitude_gopher.png)

# zygomys - An embedded scripting language for Go.

### Why use zygomys?

zygomys is an embeddable scripting language that can be used to 
quickly configure your Go project.  
It allows you to create a Domain Specific Language to drive your Go programs 
with minimal fuss and maximum convenience.

### What is zygomys?

zygomys is a modernized Lisp with an object-oriented flavor, and
provides an interpreter and REPL (Read-Eval-Print-Loop;
that is, it comes with a command line interactive interface).

It is written in Go and plays easily with Go programs
and Go structs, using reflection to instantiate trees of Go structs
from the scripted configuration. These data structures are native
Go, and Go methods will run on them at compiled-Go speed.

Because it speaks JSON and Msgpack fluently, zygomys is ideally suited for driving
complex configurations and providing projects with a domain specific
language customized to your challenges and driving Go code.

The example snippets in the tests/*.zy provide many examples.
The full [documentation can be found in the Wiki](https://github.com/glycerine/zygomys/wiki).
zygomys blends traditional and new. While the s-expression syntax
defines a Lisp, zygomys borrows some syntax from Clojure,
and some (notably the for-loop style) directly from the Go/C tradition.

The standalone REPL is called simply `zygo`.  `zygo` is also shorthand for the whole project when speaking aloud. In writing, the full `zygomys` is used to aid searchability.

### Installation

~~~
$ go get github.com/glycerine/zygomys/cmd/zygo
~~~

### Not your Grandfather's Parentheses... features in zygomys 2.0.5 include

 * [x] New in 2.0: dot-symbols! dot-symbols such as `.plane` or `.plane.wing` give OO-flavor and compact, expressive notation. [See the wiki](https://github.com/glycerine/zygomys/wiki#differences-from-traditional-lisp-syntax) for discussion.
 * [x] dot-symbols avoid the need for macros in many cases
 * [x] readable assignment: `(.a = 10)` assigns value 10 to symbol `a`  (NB use `==` for equality checks.)
 * [x] readable nested method calls: `(.a.b.c Fly)` calls method `Fly` on object `c` that lives within objects `a` and `b`.
 * [x] Use `zygo` to configure trees of Go structs, and then run methods on them at natively-compiled speed (since you are calling into Go code).
 * [x] `emacs/zygo.el` emacs mode provides one-keypress stepping through code
 * [x] command line editing, with tab-complete for keywords (courtesy of https://github.com/peterh/liner)
 * [x] JSON and Msgpack interop: serialization and deserialization.
 * [x] `(range key value hash_or_array (body))` range loops act like Go for-range loops: iterate through hashes or arrays.
 * [x] `(for [(initializer) (test) (advance)] (body))` for-loops match those in C and Go. Both `(break)` and `(continue)` are available for additional loop control.
 * [x] Raw bytes type `(raw string)` lets you do zero-copy `[]byte` manipulation.
 * [x] Record definitions `(defmap)` make configuration a breeze.
 * [x] Files can be recursively sourced with `(req path)` or `(source "path-string")`.
 * [x] Go style raw string literals, using `` `backticks` ``, can contain newlines and `"` double quotes directly. Easy templating.
 * [x] Easy to extend. See the `repl/random.go`, `repl/regexp.go`, and `repl/time.go` files for examples.
 * [x] Clojure like threading `(-> hash field1: field2:)` and `(:field hash)` selection. 
 * [x] Lisp style macros for your DSL.

### Obligatory XKCD

![Obligatory XKCD: "elegant weapons... for a more civilized age"](http://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/lisp_cycles.png)


### Additional features

 * [x] zygomys is a small Go library, easy to integrate and use/extend.
 * [x] Float (float64), Int (int64), Char, String, Symbol, List, Array, and Hash datatypes builtin.
 * [x] Arithmetic (`+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `mod`, `**`)
 * [x] Shift Operators (`sll`, `srl`, `sra`)
 * [x] Bitwise operations (`bit-and`, `bit-or`, `bit-xor`)
 * [x] Comparison operations (`<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=`, `==`, `!=`, and `not=`)
 * [x] Short-circuit boolean operators (`and` and `or`)
 * [x] Conditionals (`cond`)
 * [x] Lambdas (`fn`)
 * [x] Bindings (`def`, `defn`, and `let`)
 * [x] Standalone and embedable REPL.
 * [x] Tail-call optimization
 * [x] Go API
 * [x] Macro System with macexpand `(macexpand (your-macro))` makes writing/debugging macros easy. 
 * [x] Syntax quoting -- with caret `^()` instead of backtick.
 * [x] Channel and goroutine support
 * [x] Lexical scope.

[See the wiki for lots of details and a full description of the zygomys language.](https://github.com/glycerine/zygomys/wiki).

### Where did the name zygomys come from?

zygomys is a contraction of Zygogeomys, [a genus of pocket gophers. The Michoacan pocket gopher (Zygogeomys trichopus) finds its natural habitat in high-altitude forests.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michoacan_pocket_gopher)

The term is also descriptive. The stem `zygo` comes from the Greek for yoke, indicating a pair or a union of two things, and `mys` comes from the Greek for mouse. The union of Go and Lisp in a small cute package, that is zygomys.

### License

Two-clause BSD, see LICENSE file.

### Author

Jason E. Aten, Ph.D.

### Credits

The ancestor dialect, [Glisp](https://github.com/zhemao/glisp), was designed and implemented by [Howard Mao](https://zhehaomao.com/).

The Go gopher was designed by Renee French. (http://reneefrench.blogspot.com/)
The design is licensed under the Creative Commons 3.0 Attributions license.
Read this article for more details: https://blog.golang.org/gopher

[XKCD https://xkcd.com/297/](https://xkcd.com/297/) licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 2.5 License(https://xkcd.com/license.html).
